Please welcome Tom Dowdy.
Thank you.
Good morning.
This session is entitled QuickTime:
The Road to Mac OS X, which,
contrary to what you might be thinking,
is not San Carlos Street out there.
What are we going to be
talking about this morning?
We're going to be talking about
QuickTime on the OS X platform and things
that you need to know about QuickTime on
the OS X platform for your application.
We're also going to cover some new
things that are true for all platforms,
including the Mac OS X platform,
that are different from the last
time we got together a year ago.
We're going to talk about
extending the QuickTime platform.
This is on the existing
Mac platform on Windows and,
of course, on Mac OS X.
The important thing to
know about QuickTime on
Mac OS X is that QuickTime is a
first-class citizen of Mac OS X.
Most of the things that
you've come to know and love
about QuickTime are the same.
They haven't really changed.
A few things are gone,
a few things have been added,
and there's some new
opportunities for you,
the developer.
You can call QuickTime from either
the Carbon or Cocoa API set.
You can also call QuickTime from Java.
Here's the classic picture of Mac OS X.
You can see that QuickTime is layered
down with all of the other graphical
goodies that are on Mac OS X.
What's the same?
The same APIs are available on Mac OS X,
on Windows, on Mac OS 9, Mac OS 8,
and Mac OS 7.
We finally, this year, cut off Mac OS 6.
So those of you that still
have applications that are
targeted for the 607 platform,
sorry, that's the end for you.
I think most people have read by now.
All of the major codexes you've
come to know and love are there
on QuickTime for Mac OS X.
That includes streaming, VR,
the wired actions you just heard about,
the URL data handlers.
In fact,
There may be more there than you
are used to if you're used to
using QuickTime on other platforms.
We'll get to that in just a moment.
There are a few things
we had to take away.
Not very much, though.
In fact,
we had a difficult time coming up with
what exactly we did remove for Mac OS X.
The major one from an API standpoint
is the various Git file preview calls,
such as standard Git file preview
or custom Git file preview.
These are no longer necessary.
Nav Services provides the
preview services for opening and
closing documents on Mac OS X,
so there's no need for additional
work that we are going to be doing.
Simply use Nav Services in your
application and you'll be fine.
Some codecs that were related to
legacy types of technology that are
no longer available on Mac OS X,
those codecs also don't need to be there.
There's some excellent new opportunities
for you if you're new to QuickTime or
you're new to the Mac OS X platform.
Some of the new features that we've
been talking about in QuickTime are
available first on the Mac OS X platform.
In fact, they're in the PR4 CD that you
got here at the conference.
Flash 4 and Cubic VR are
good examples of this.
Those technologies are there for you
to play with and enjoy right now.
They'll be available for you to
play with and enjoy later this
summer for the other platforms.
One of the important things that has
been asked earlier in the conference,
and unfortunately I didn't get a
chance to grab the Carbon guys before
they were doing their presentation,
is the issue of the event run loop,
or the timer events, and idling of movies
within your application.
So, I'm going to do a little demo here,
and then we're going to come
back and talk about idling.
So if I'd have demo two up.
Oh,
we see that demo two has gone to sleep.
I think the audio/video is back now,
so we should be able to get it back up.
Alright.
So here we are.
We're running the
QuickTime player application.
Just if you haven't seen this
enough so far in the conference.
Open up a movie here.
I'll start playing this.
Now you can see that the
movie continues to play,
even when other things are
going on in the computer.
That's because of the various
multitasking services that
are available in Mac OS X.
It's a little difficult to
see probably on the projector,
but the movie is actually transparently
being displayed through the menu,
as I've got the menu bar down here,
which is kind of a nice little feature,
being composited live.
One of the things that
wasn't pointed out though,
and that if you had seen the
demo at the Mac-- I'm going
to start this movie again.
If you'd seen this demo at Macworld,
you wouldn't have noticed--
and David Schmuck,
who are the founders of QuickTime.
The first thing you'll notice,
because it wasn't true,
is that the equalizer bars in
the lower right-hand corner
of the movie continue to move.
This is idling and user
interaction of the application
that's not specific to QuickTime.
In addition,
the play bar at the bottom of the
movie and the time of where we are
in the movie on the left-hand side
continue to advance as the movie is
played even though the mouse is down.
I'll stop that there and
we'll go back to slides.
Why is this important?
This is important because this is a
section of the application that could not
possibly be handled by QuickTime itself.
These are user interface idling services
that are unique to this application.
So it's the application's
responsibility to service the idling.
That includes the idling of the movie
and the idling of its own user interface.
In specific, if you, the application,
are doing the movie idling,
It's important for you to be involved
because of the following reason.
The idling calls in QuickTime have
an implied API around them,
which is that the origin of the
window affects where the movie is
displayed within your application.
If we idled the movies on your behalf,
we would not know where you may
have set focus within your window.
Those of you who are used to
using Power Plant or other such
frameworks realize that you
focus on various subviews within
your superview of the window.
That process involves setting
the origin of the window.
As that focus would be moving from
button to button or subview to subview
within your application's window,
if we suddenly came along and
idled one of the movies for you,
you'd find the iMovie Kids movie suddenly
playing on top of your pause button,
rather than where in the
window it was supposed to go.
Because of this,
and because of the fact that
your application also has other
movie-related idle tasks to do,
we do not idle the movies on your behalf.
was the demo.
Let's talk about some changes
inside your application.
On the road to OS X,
the QuickTime team also
went down that road.
We had a lot of work to do to get
QuickTime performing well on OS X and
running the way it's supposed to.
Most of these things we'd already
done for many of our components.
Some of them we hadn't done at
all for any of our components,
so we had to go through
these steps ourself.
If you have been to any
of the Carbon sessions,
you've probably heard some
of these things before,
so I'm not going to belabor
them over and over again.
There are two that are
particularly important,
I think,
and so I'm going to call them out.
You're making a lot of major
changes to your application,
potentially,
in the process of carbonizing it.
You're going to be re-qualifying it
and re-qualifying it on a new OS.
Now is a really good time to remove
some of the older legacy code that
you might have hanging around.
A good example of this is applications
or codecs that check for the
presence of color quickdraw,
even though they're compiled for PowerPC.
The PowerPC has always
had color quickdraw.
That check is unnecessary.
It's slowing down the
loading of the application,
slowing down the loading of the codec,
and adding additional dependencies on
parts of the system that you really
don't need to be worrying about.
So take a pause, look at your app.
That file that you haven't
touched since 1989,
you might want to look at once or twice.
Another really good trick that we
discovered inside the QuickTime team,
you want to be compiling your
application with the maximum
amount of type checking turned on,
because graph ports, windows,
dialog pointers are no longer
freely castable back and forth.
If you're not performing
casting yourself,
the compiler will catch this
type of behavior and point
it out to you very quickly.
You'll be able to correct it, move on,
make the appropriate Carbon calls,
and your application
will be sailing along.
However, every once in a while, somebody,
either through habit or knowledge that,
a lack of knowledge that
this is not necessary,
will be performing additional
casts between one type and another.
It's a good idea to search your
application for graph pointers,
window pointers, and dialog pointers.
The searches I have here,
you'll notice they don't have a
beginning parentheses on them.
That's because if you search for
graph pointer closed parentheses,
you'll also catch all the casts
to type color graph port as well.
Any time you see one of these casts,
you should examine that code.
Try to figure out why it's being
done and correct it if necessary.
This is especially important if
you're using Carbon on OS 9 as part
of your bring-up strategy for OS X.
These types of compiler errors
or casting errors will not
be caught by running on OS 9,
where graph pointers, window pointers,
and dialog pointers may still be
freely castable back and forth.
But when you try to bring
your application up on OS X,
they'll crash very hard.
Much easier to fix this by grepping
inside of your development system than
playing with GDB on the other system.
Here's a very important point.
Mac OS X is a preemptive
multitasking operating system.
If you have an application
that has interrupts,
completion routines associated
with those interrupts,
you need to be aware that interrupts
can be running in a separate thread.
And these threads can
preempt one another.
The specific case that you would
never see on the classic Macintosh
operating system is that while
you are servicing an interrupt
in one of your callback routines,
your main thread might
start running again.
This can happen on Mac OS X and
will happen on Mac OS X.
If your code is not
ready to deal with this,
if you're not appropriately
putting mutexes,
semaphores,
or other types of OS-level protection
around global variables that you're
accessing both from your main thread
and your interrupt completion routine,
you're going to have a very difficult
time tracking down these problems
when you're running on Mac OS X.
These same issues arrived on Windows,
and they're problems that we've
been having to deal with inside of
QuickTime for quite some time now.
So when we were bringing
our code up on Mac OS X,
we needed to make sure that we were
doing all the same level of protection
on Mac OS X as we do on Windows.
As a matter of fact, just two days ago,
we tracked down a bug
where we'd missed one.
So with that,
I'd like to bring out Greg Chapman,
have him come and talk to you about new
features that are available on all the
platforms in the last year in QuickTime.
Greg?
Thank you.
I'm going to be talking about some
of the new things that we've added
to QuickTime since the last time
we had a developers conference.
Three things in particular.
Variable bitrate audio is something
that we've been asked for a lot.
We finally added that to support
the variable bitrate MP3 files.
Of course, you could actually open
files and URLs before this,
but there's some new
twists that need reviewing.
Kevin Calhoun talked about this a little
bit in the streaming session yesterday,
but we'll go through that
in a little bit more detail.
The coolest thing about
all these new features,
and variable bitrate
audio is just an example,
is that existing apps will
pick up this support for free.
You don't have to rev your app.
There are a couple of
exceptions in this case.
The main exception is if you call the
sound manager directly to play audio,
then you need to know a few things.
I'm going to give you
some of the highlights,
point you at the real documentation.
We've got lots of documentation
on these new features,
and you'll be ready to go.
There's a new constant
variable compression.
It's actually been in the
sound.h header for a long time,
but it's never been supported.
It's right next to fixed compression.
We support it now.
It's great.
Several structures have been extended.
If you don't know what
those structures are,
you don't need to know
that they've been extended,
and we'll just take care of it for you.
The biggest problem that you're
going to have to deal with in
your code is if you call the sound
converter APIs and you want to be
able to convert to or from VBR audio.
There's a new API.
It's well documented on our website.
The old Sound Converter Convert
Buffer API had a lot of assumptions
about relationships between
input and output buffers that,
of course,
get completely blown away by VBR audio.
Sound Converter Fill Buffer
is much more flexible.
You can use it for VBR and for CBR audio.
We recommend that you do that.
You pass it a callback routine
that it will call every time
it needs more source data,
and that callback will get called a
completely variable number of times.
There are a couple of flags
that it will return to let
you know what its status is,
if it couldn't fill its output buffer,
or if it has data left over.
Your code can deal with
that pretty simply.
The QuickTime 401 PDF is going to be
referenced several times in the slides.
This has a whole pile of information
about some of these new features.
It's easy to find up on our website.
64-bit file offset support has
been in QuickTime for a while.
We supported it on Windows because
they had a file system that
would support these large files.
With Mac OS 9 and QuickTime 4.1,
64-bit file offset support,
really huge files,
is supported on all of our platforms.
Again, existing apps will pick
this up with no change,
no problem at all.
The two exceptions,
one exception is if your app
creates or modifies movies,
then you need to be able to read and
write these new type of movie atoms.
We're real careful not to use the
new movie atoms unless the file
actually is bigger than 2 gigs,
so that if the file
is a small movie file,
your old app will be able to
read it without having to rev.
The other exception is if you write a
component that provides file access.
In this case,
not only do you need to call
the new APIs in the toolbox
to deal with the file,
but you actually have to implement some
new component calls in your component.
[Transcript missing]
There's a new document
that's coming out this week.
I believe it's already
posted on the website.
Inside QuickTime,
the QuickTime file format.
This is way more detailed than you're
going to need unless you're one
of those lucky people that gets to
parse movie files by hand a bite at
a time without the use of QuickTime,
and then you'll really
want to read that manual.
Opening files and URLs doesn't
sound very exciting,
but there are three cool things
I want to tell you about,
and apparently one of
them is really cool.
DataRefs are an abstraction of
various types of data sources,
and Kevin talked about this yesterday.
and David For using to get to URLs.
New Movie from DataRef can
actually open files as well.
If you use New Movie from File,
that's fine, but you can set up a DataRef
that points at a file.
You can set up a DataRef
that points at a handle.
You can set up DataRefs that
point at lots of things.
This is actually an
extensible part of QuickTime.
You could write a component that
extends QuickTime and adds a new type
of DataRef and QuickTime would then
be able to read data from your source.
New Movie from DataRef can open any piece
of media that QuickTime understands.
Get Graphics Importer for DataRef
is specific for still images.
You can open still images
with New Movie from DataRef,
but you'll get a movie
with one frame in it,
which may be useful, but probably isn't.
As I said, files are data refs.
A data ref is just a handle,
and it contains some piece of information
that points you at a data source.
In this case,
the handle just contains an alias.
And then you pass in to
new movie from data ref,
there's a second parameter that you
tell it what type of data ref it is.
Pretty straightforward.
The next slide is going to take
that gold code and change it to
open a URL instead of a file.
But the call to new movie
from DataRef is identical.
There you go.
URL is a C string.
Don't forget that null termination.
Put it in a handle.
Pass it off to new movie from DataRef.
As Kevin said yesterday,
the web can be slow.
Async movie loading is
new in QuickTime 4.1,
but it's just an extension of
what we were already doing.
We already had the concept of FastStart,
where the movie can start playing
before all the media is down.
But in FastStart,
the entire movie header does need to
be downloaded before you can play.
So a new movie from DataRef
doesn't return until the entire
movie header has been downloaded.
and in some cases over slow connections,
that can be pretty slow.
What you can do is use the
New Movie Async OK flag,
which will take
FastStart one step further.
New Movie from DataRef
will return immediately.
with basically an empty movie,
which you then can't play.
The return movie isn't all there,
and you have to continue
tasking the movie.
If you're using a movie controller,
which we recommend,
you continue passing events to
the movie controller because
this async opening of the movie
doesn't happen at interrupt time,
it happens at task time.
As you task it,
more of the movie comes down.
GetMovieLowState is the API you call to
find out when your movie is playable.
There's several states.
It's loading means that the
header isn't all the way down yet,
so please don't start playing yet.
It's playable.
Complete actually means
that all the media is down.
The fast start has finished
and the whole movie is down,
so now you can turn on saving in
your app or something like that.
You can get an error state back,
and there's another API to
call to get movie state,
or get movie error,
to find out what the error is.
The states are on a numeric scale.
You should use arithmetic comparisons
because we reserve the right to
insert new states in between.
But if you say, you know,
is less than playable, don't play it.
That's always going to be good forever.
Now we get to the really cool thing.
I'm going to demo this
for you in just a minute.
You can call new movie from DataRef or
get graphics imported for DataRef on
any file that QuickTime understands.
You don't need to know anything
at all about the file format.
We wrote a simple app that's
so lame it doesn't even know
about graphics importers.
It just calls new movie from
DataRef on anything you drop on it,
sets up a movie controller,
sets it up to play,
and starts tasking the movie controller.
And let's see what that lame app can do.
Go over to demo one.
There it is,
we call it Simple Movie Player.
Let's just drag a whole bunch
of still images onto it.
Now these will open as movies,
but that's alright,
we'll get to see them anyway.
Oh, we have a JPEG.
We have a BMP file for
you Windows fanatics.
An SGI image.
Let's see, what do we got here?
I can scale this down so
you can see more of it.
A Photoshop file that we modified
extensively for our stupid movie.
We have a ping.
We have a target file.
Oh, here's a Mac Paint image.
That's great.
We have a TIFF.
Let's see what else we can do.
Got a bunch of audio files here.
This movie player just does
the same thing to all of them.
Here's an interesting
WAV file we found somewhere.
I actually dragged that
off of my Windows machine.
Here's an AIFF.
You know, all pretty standard.
Here's a cheap MIDI file.
We can play those too.
Sound Designer 2.
Here's an MP3.
We've just got a whole pile of things,
and Simple Movie Player doesn't do
anything different for any of these.
He doesn't know what these files are,
he just makes those API calls,
and everything works.
Let's see, we've got a couple of little
more movie-like things.
Here's a flick animation.
Ah, here's an interesting AVI file.
What lets you learn about
the world in a whole new way?
Boo-hiss.
Okay, here's an animated
GIF of an iMac for you.
Okay, there we go.
Here's a DV stream,
straight off a camera.
One seed, two seed, red seed, blue seed.
You can play that.
Here's some more interesting
things we can do.
Here's a flash animation, an SWF file.
Oh, you got mouse rollovers?
You know, the app doesn't know anything
from mouse rollovers.
No big deal.
Here's an RTSP file that,
let's see what's playing on BBC World.
This is always a risk because you
don't know what's playing on BBC World.
Some horrible tragedy
that happened today,
I don't know.
Now streaming is interesting because
you come in not at a given rate.
So you end up with gray
and then it comes blue.
So there's the BBC.
Here's one of those really cool
Matthew movies that he set up.
If anybody saw that demo,
it's kind of fun.
It's a calculator in a movie.
Let's take the tangent of that.
I don't know how he
does the trig functions,
because we don't have wired
actions for trig functions.
He must be rotating sprites or something.
I don't know.
That's insane.
And here is what I feel is the
key feature of QuickTime 4.1.
Something people have been
asking for for a long time.
This is huge, so this app doesn't really
know how to scale very well.
I can scale it down by
half so you can see it.
This is a TIFF fax.
We finally support in QuickTime 4.1.
This is kind of an interesting
patent if you read this here.
It's a three-zone bed cover
with an inflatable human form.
If you could see farther down,
it actually says that
that's for security reasons,
so some burglar would actually think
there's more than one of you there.
I don't know.
There's a lot of TIFF faxes
at the patent office,
you will find.
We can go back to slides.
Thank you.
And with that,
I'd like to introduce you to Sam Bushell.
He actually wrote the
TIFF Facts Importer,
so you can thank him for that.
Welcome, Sam.
Thank you.
Good morning.
Do you appreciate TIFF Facts?
I'm glad you care.
Tom and Greg have talked about using
QuickTime on various platforms.
I'd like to talk about
QuickTime as a platform itself.
QuickTime is a platform
for doing stuff with media.
and David In my words.
So if you have some media technology
and you bring it into QuickTime,
you gain interoperability with
hundreds of existing applications.
The way you extend QuickTime is
by writing components,
and that's what I'm going
to talk to you about.
So first let's survey some component
types that are pretty important.
If you've developed a media
compression technology which you'd
like to support within QuickTime,
then the way you do that is
by implementing a compressor
and decompressor component
pair to implement it.
Now, your compressed data will
automatically be stored using
the QuickTime file format.
All you have to deal with is the
tiny step of moving between the sound
or video and your compressed data.
If you write the compressor,
then it will appear in all
of the standard compression
dialogs for that media type.
For streaming, there are two important
component types at this level.
There's packetizer components,
which break out compressed
media data into packets that
can be sent over the wire.
And then there's reassembler components,
which combine those packets
back into media samples which
are ready for decompression.
Now, you don't necessarily
have to write those.
QuickTime is able to stream your
content without you having a
custom packetizer and reassembler.
But in that situation,
you don't get any codec-specific
resilience to data loss.
For example,
if you're watching a video stream and
you lose one packet out of a video frame,
then the user doesn't get to see that
entire video frame or any subsequent
frames until the next keyframe.
So that's a big loss.
On the other hand,
if you devise an RTP payload format that
can incorporate some cleverness that's
specific to your data format and is
able to recover from some packet loss,
then you can implement a packetizer
and reassembler pair to make that work.
Still image is my favorite.
QuickTime's model for still
image support on the import
side is split into two pieces:
graphics importers, which handle the
specifics of file formats,
and image decompressors,
which handle the specifics of the
compressed media data inside them.
Now, graphics importers have taken
off as a platform in themselves.
You'll see a lot of applications
which list the file formats they
support as these 12 plus any
other that QuickTime supports.
By writing a graphics
importer for your file format,
you insert yourself into
all of these applications.
The situation is similar
with graphics exporters,
although there are fewer applications
that are interested in writing
files than there are that read them.
When writing graphics exporters,
you have the choice of whether you keep
your compression technology inside the
graphics exporter or whether you package
it inside a separate image compressor.
If it's inside the image compressor,
then that will appear in all of
the standard compression dialogs.
It's up to you whether that's
the way you want to go.
For instance,
we don't think it's a sensible idea
to have Mac Paint appear in the
static video compression dialog,
because not many people want
to have one-bit 7x11 movies.
It just isn't a very popular format.
People often start thinking
of QuickTime's movie import
components as file translators.
Start off with an XYZ file,
write out a movie file,
but they're actually a
whole lot cooler than that,
as Greg demonstrated.
A movie import component simply
needs to be able to parse some file
and identify where the compressed
media samples are in that file,
and then create a movie header
in memory that references
those samples inside the file.
Once you've done that,
QuickTime can play the movie
straight out of that original file.
This is called import in place,
and it's why you can take an animated
GIF or an AVI file and open it in
simple text or a simple app like that.
Writing video effects is a lot
of fun and it's pretty easy.
We have lots of samples.
I'll show you a demo of a
really cool third-party video
effect in just a moment.
Now, media handler components are the
part of QuickTime that implement
individual tracks inside a movie.
If you have a time-based media
technology which doesn't fit into
the existing models that the existing
track types in QuickTime handle,
you can implement it in
a custom media handler.
An example of that is PuppetTime.
If your company develops hardware
that can bring media into the computer
or play it back out of the computer,
then you'd write one of these components
to enable QuickTime applications
to take advantage of it.
A particularly important one
of these is the bottom one,
Video Digitizers.
I should point out for those of you
who are interested in Video Digitizers
that there is a Birds of a Feather
session tonight at 6:30 p.m.
I believe the room is A1 or A2,
but there'll be people standing
around there that look like
QuickTime engineers and people who are
[Transcript missing]
Some of the component interfaces inside
QuickTime involve an awful lot of
fairly dull bookkeeping details that
don't relate to every implementation.
To let you focus on the
piece where you add value,
we've implemented a collection
of base components which handle
the most common details for you.
In some cases,
it's very hard to get these
details correct by yourself.
For example, the base image decompressor
helps you handle asynchronous
queued schedule decompression
Without handling the queue yourself,
we look after that.
We look after all of the reentrancy,
the race conditions,
and mutex protection for the queue,
and a bunch of other related issues.
We found that we could get rid of
a lot of bugs in QuickTime when
we switched over a bunch of
our other image decompressor
components to use the base codec.
So if you're going to write
any of these components,
please start with the base
components for these categories.
You will save yourself a lot of strife.
And now, I'm going to demonstrate
some cool third-party things.
[Transcript missing]
It has a little bit of audio in it.
And with QuickTime Player,
I can choose export movie to
QuickTime movie and then select a
filter and you get a preview here.
It's definitely installed,
but it's not real time.
It's actually quite slow.
So I've did this movie ahead of time
so that you can get to enjoy it.
This video effect was developed
by the same people responsible
for some of the special effects
in the movie What Dreams May Come.
It's a really phenomenal
visual thing to look at.
And so they decided to make it available
to general customers of people using
QuickTime and a few other apps for the
[Transcript missing]
So, okay, there's a video effect being
used by a QuickTime application.
You can extend QuickTime.
That's interesting.
Here's another situation.
Here's a file format from
a company called BitJazz.
The file format is called PhotoJazz.
It's a lossless compression
format for pictures.
It's fairly expressive.
These are all the same picture,
so you don't get to see much
difference between them.
There's a Photoshop version,
a Ping version,
and the PhotoJazz version.
And their big deal is that they claim to
do better compression than everyone else.
They're certainly a lot smaller
than the parrot in Photoshop.
They're a good one.
[Transcript missing]
But if your business is developing a
file format or compression technology,
it's a tough job if you have to go and
talk to individual application developers
just to get them to support it.
These guys wrote the
QuickTime components to support this,
a graphics importer and
a graphics exporter,
and they have different levels of
graphics exporter that you can-- of
writing support that you can get by
paying them different amounts of money.
But everyone gets the viewer for free,
as you see.
So that's PhotoJazz running
inside PictureViewer.
In each case, this is just extending
a QuickTime application,
which is often the way we
demonstrate things because,
well, they're the applications
that we're familiar with.
What's rather more interesting for
users is where they're taking a
third-party application and having
that application's power extended by...
[Transcript missing]
Painting uses QuickTime video
effects as filters.
And so I can choose Video Go here,
and one of the other choices
besides oil painting is chalk.
This is going to give you an
idea of why it's not really real
time for doing a video effect.
It takes a moment,
but it's a great effect.
So here we have a third-party
application and two different third-party
components all working together.
I don't believe, or I don't know,
but there's no sign that any of
these individual third-party vendors
had to communicate with each other
in order to establish a standard.
Just the involvement of QuickTime here
has enabled them to work together.
I think that's neat.
So let's talk about writing your
own components now that you've
seen what the competition can do.
There's an awful lot of sample code
on the QuickTime developer website,
which does include a wide
variety of sample components.
They're sometimes a little bit buried,
and you may have to try several
before you find the right one
for what you're trying to do.
Rather than discuss
these individual samples,
I'm going to talk about some
of the key concepts that are
absolutely important for any kind of
component that you want to develop.
First of all, I'm going to talk about
component dispatches.
Now, conceptually,
a component is a cohesive module of code
that works for a particular purpose,
like a Tiff Fax graphics importer.
Each component has a single entry point,
known as the dispatcher,
and it knows about the functions that
are implemented by that component,
and it knows how to route the calls
that come in to those components.
Now, notice that the functions on this
All have numbers next to them.
These numbers are called selectors.
Negative selectors are common
to all component types.
Non-negative ones,
that's zero and positive numbers,
are specific to the component
type you're dealing with,
and sometimes the component subtype.
The four top ones you see here are
component functions that have to
be implemented by every component.
They're open, which allocates storage
for your component and
anything else that you need.
Close, which gets rid of it.
Can do, which finds out whether
a particular selector is
implemented by your component.
And version,
for determining the difference
between-- for establishing
the version of your component,
in case someone needs to know that.
So the job of the dispatcher
is to know the relationship
between a number and a function,
and to call the right
one at the right time.
It doesn't seem like a big deal.
Unfortunately, it's a nuisance.
It's easy to get wrong.
There are fiddly details that are
different on different platforms.
We have a tool that helps
address these problems called
Component Dispatch Helper.
That's what we use internally for writing
almost all of our QuickTime components.
And it isn't perfect, but it's well used.
And it does generate both the dispatcher
and the can do from a single list,
so they don't get out of sync.
It's also faster and more
robust than doing it by hand
once you've got the hang of it.
So it is also demonstrated by
some of the pieces of sample code,
although the sample code also
demonstrates alternatives to using it.
So I'm not going to explain
how to use it in great detail,
but it's very useful to be able to
[Transcript missing]
Now, if your component doesn't
implement some selectors,
you still need to put empty slots there
so that functions with later selectors
go into the right slots in the table.
The component dispatch helper,
because of the limitations
of macros in C,
doesn't protect you
from that kind of stuff.
So you need to be a little bit careful
and need to have in mind what this
is actually doing when you use it.
But if you do,
you should probably be okay.
Let's also talk about the
way we describe components.
There's a resource
called the THNG resource,
or the Thing resource.
Now, a little bit of history.
The component manager was
originally called the Thing Manager.
and Component instances
were Thing instances.
Legend has it that Apple's technical
writers found it too hard to write
meaningful documentation about
Things and begged the engineering
team to call them Components instead.
Who knows
Let's have a look at a
Thing resource for a 68k component,
a classic type.
We have fields that have the type,
subtype, and manufacturer codes.
There's four character codes.
We have a flags field.
We have resource type and
IDs that identify the code
resource and some strings.
And there's some other stuff in
there that I've omitted for clarity.
Note that the first byte of the code
resource is the entry point here.
Every time you make a component
call on a 68K component,
it'll JSR to that.
We don't use the code resource
field for PowerPC components.
Instead,
we added something back years ago,
which was an extension called
the Component Platform Array.
You can actually have a single thing
resource that describes the code
to be used on multiple platforms,
and the component manager
chooses the right one when
it registers that component.
So,
if you have the Component Platform Array,
you have to set a bit
called hasMultiplePlatforms.
Even if there's only one,
it's a rather poorly named constant.
We admit that,
but there's not much we can do
to change it in the past now.
Also note that the flags have been
moved down from where they were to
part of the component platform array.
This means that different
component implementations,
different code on different platforms,
can actually have different flags,
which is sometimes a useful property.
So in this case, the code resource is a
PowerPC PEF container with a
routine descriptor-- sorry,
the main entry point for that
PEF container is a routine descriptor
that's wrapped around the dispatcher.
What about Mac OS X?
Well, I've just moved the diagram across.
This is the same as you were
seeing on the previous slide.
I've just chopped off the top bit.
On Mac OS X,
there are two linkage models.
There's the Code Fragment Manager,
and there's also Maco,
the Mac object format.
However, Mac OS X does not support
code and code resources.
It has to be in the data fork somehow.
For CFM, the code is in a PEF container
inside the data fork,
and it's described by a CFRAG resource.
Now, you can have multiple PEF containers
in a single data fork,
so you don't have to have
a proliferation of files,
but you have a single CFRAG resource
that describes them all.
And the number that is normally
a resource ID is actually a tag
that has to match a field inside,
an entry inside that
extended CFRAG resource.
With Marco, the entry point is
identified by a symbol name,
and so the symbol name is stored in
a string resource with type DLLE.
Now, since the namespace for
Marco symbols is flat,
you should take care to give your
entry point a distinctive name.
Otherwise, you might have the situation
where two different vendors both
chose my component entry point,
and the results of a collision like
that would be highly unpleasant.
Also note that there are no
routine descriptors on Mac OS X.
In both cases here,
the entry point is the dispatcher itself,
not RAT.
Accordingly,
the platform type has changed from
PowerPC to PowerPC native entry point.
Let's go over that again.
On Mac OS X,
the entry point is not wrapped
in a routine descriptor.
And the platform type is
PowerPC native entry point.
Another thing, CarbonLib components.
Components should only link
to CarbonLib on Mac OS X,
not on Mac OS 9.
It turns out that the CarbonLib
extension on Mac OS 8 and 9
currently only provides support
for applications and some plug-ins,
not for general components.
There are some technical
reasons behind that.
If you want to deliver a single file
that your users can use on each platform,
however, you can.
Your thing resources would
have two component platforms in
the component platform array,
and one of them would
be PowerPC platform,
which would link to InterfaceLib
and have a routine descriptor,
and one of them would be one for 10,
which would say
PowerPC native entry point,
have no routine descriptor,
and be in the data fork.
and link to CovenLib.
Also note that the DLLE,
you might have guessed by the name,
the mechanism that we use on Mac OS is
the same as we use on Windows.
So if you're familiar with one side,
the other side should be pretty easy.
In some situations, you need to register
your component twice.
For example,
if you want to write a graphics
importer or a movie importer,
the component subtype for that component
might be interpreted as a file type,
or you could set a bit that
said it should be interpreted
as a file name suffix.
You probably want people to
be able to open your files if
they have one of those right,
but not the other,
in which case you need to register
your component twice so that
the lookups both work correctly.
There's a good shorthand for doing
this called a component alias.
It's slightly more efficient
than having two thing resources
that both describe the same code.
It basically tells the component
manager to register a second component
with the same code as the first,
but with a different
subtype or different flags.
So what happens when things go wrong
when you're working on these components?
If your component doesn't load initially,
first thing to ask is,
did it get registered okay?
You could write some code
like this and run it,
or you could use one
of the tools that I'll
If you've established that
the component is registered,
you should find out whether
it actually executes.
You could set a breakpoint in your open
routine and run some code like this.
The usual things that go wrong
when we're working on components,
we find that people often forget
the hasMultiplePlatforms bit,
partly because it had that poor name.
This flag really means this
is not a 68K component,
so you need to set this bit for
practically all components you write now.
If this bit isn't set,
that'll prevent the
component from registering.
Now, other problems that occur where
the component gets to register,
but it can't ever be opened.
Basically,
troubleshooting these involves working
from the thing resource through to your
code and making sure that all the steps
along the way are correctly set up.
That the resource ID in the thing
resource points to the DLE string,
and that that has a name that
matches the next step and so forth,
and that the entry point that's in that
string is exported from your library.
So there are a few tools which are
very useful for browsing the components
that are installed on a computer.
I'm going to demonstrate a
couple of these in a moment.
The free one is MaxBug.
Every version of MaxBug that you can use
with current versions of Mac OS 9 has a
built-in debugger command called Thing.
I'll show you that in a sec.
There are also a couple of nice shareware
tools with graphical interfaces.
There's one that's new today, I think.
It's certainly new this week,
called Thing Detective.
There's a free subversion called
Thing Reporter from Unthinkable Research.
There's also, I think,
Thing from Tactic Software.
Before I show you those tools,
I'd like to mention another thing
that's very useful when you're
actually working on a component.
It's very annoying if you have to
restart every time you make a change
in the code and recompile and rebuild.
Instead,
if you drag your component onto a
small application called Reinstaller,
Reinstaller 3 at the moment,
it will unregister the previous
version of your component and
register the new one in its place.
You don't need to restart
to make that work.
And I will demonstrate that as well,
because I have plenty of time.
So, let's go and have a look
at some of these things.
Down here we have Thing Detective from
Unthinkable Research.
There are a lot of components
installed in this machine.
And you can -- this is a
nice graphical view of them.
They all have a name,
or most of them have a name.
They have a type.
Subtype,
and you can sort by all of these things.
Let's go and see if we can
find the components that we
were playing with earlier.
Let's look for PhotoJazz.
Here we are.
Here's the graphics exporter component.
Let's keep going down and
find the graphics importer.
Here we are.
So let's see what it
can tell us about this.
It tells us the type, subtype,
and manufacturer.
It says there aren't
currently any instances.
If I went and opened
that in Picture Viewer,
this number would change to 1.
can also tell us about
the file it came from.
It can tell us information
about the Thing resource.
It's actually found a bug.
It's actually found that the
icon resources are missing or
perhaps should just not be listed.
I don't actually recommend that you
store icons inside your Thing resources.
They're mostly a waste
of space in the file.
They're not used by many parts
of the browsing applications.
You can if you want.
But it doesn't make any difference.
This is a totally benign problem.
There's also something
we added in QuickTime 4.0
called public resource maps.
These are a way of attaching
extra information to components.
There are a few places
where this is nice.
It basically lets us make
some of the APIs much faster,
such as the dialog that came up
that showed the QuickTime effects.
It's faster for it to build that list
because it can work out the names
and the properties of individual
video effects without having to
load and open each one in turn.
If you can just pull information out
using the component resource map,
the component public resource map,
then that's a lot faster.
We can also browse the flags
that this component has set,
and it knows about some of these by name,
which is rather neat.
It can also run the can do
function on the component to
see which things it supports,
and you can see this supports
all of the required selectors
and one that's not required.
And here are all of the ones that
are specific to graphics importers.
and What are component aliases?
You can also tell us a bit about them.
Here, this component is a second alias.
You notice the subtype for
the first one was j little z,
little z space.
This one is in uppercase,
and there's a bit that's set in the
[Transcript missing]
So it's the second alias
to the first component.
So this is a component alias,
and you can tell here,
and here's the component
that it's an alias to.
So this is a way of going through and
checking that your component is correctly
set up and that it's saying all of
the things that you think it should.
It's a nice way to be able to
interact with your software.
Thing Detective is available now.
You can go to the website
at www.unthinkable.com.
There's the plug.
We also have some image decompressors.
I said that video filters
were implemented as a special
case of decompressors.
And here's the Video Go one
from Revision Effects.
So that's the nice, pretty view.
If you're a programmer,
or you happen to-- if
you're a programmer,
and you know how to use maxbug,
and you're not frightened by it,
then there is the
alternative that I mentioned,
using the thingd command.
I'm going to drop into maxbug now.
Don't be afraid.
Okay, I can print out a list of
the components that are here.
There's a lot of them,
so I'd have to page through.
I can also type thing and
then one particular component
type just to print out,
for instance, let's print out the
RTP reassembler components.
They're the ones that are
installed on this computer.
I can print out a list of the
open components by saying thing-o,
and here you see that there are
a few components that are open.
Oh, I must have MoviePlayer running.
There's some help in the
dcommand help for that.
It's obviously nicer to use a
graphical view for some things,
but if you happen to be crashed
and you're working out why,
it's very useful to have
the thing dcommand as well.
Let's leave this line installed there.
Let's talk about while you're
debugging a new component.
I have here one of the sample
components on the website.
It's a set of graphics importer,
movie importer,
and image decompressor for a file
format called Electric Image.
And I've modified this slightly.
I've put all of the components
that were pre-built into one file,
and I've also changed their names
to have spaces so that you'll
see them in the window behind me.
But first of all,
let's bring up QuickTime Player.
Oh, it's the same one.
Cool.
And let's try opening...
[Transcript missing]
What a fun file format this is.
You'll also notice that these components
have all appeared in this list.
And if we would watch the open instances,
these numbers would probably
have jumped up and down as well.
So that's a great way of confirming
that things are basically working well.
And to some extent,
it can help you with troubleshooting.
I think that's all I can
think of with those.
So, let's summarize.
We seem to be early in
Tom was talking about Mac OS X,
and basically not much has changed.
A few things that you need to clean
up as part of your carbonization of
your application aren't a big deal.
Greg pointed out some of the APIs that
we had that were added in QuickTime 4.1.
While you're carbonizing
your application,
it's a good time to have a look
at those and see if you'd like
to support 64-bit file offsets,
VBR sound if you're a sound app,
and certainly
URL capabilities in your app.
Those can be a lot of fun.
We have a QuickTime feedback forum.
We don't tend to do Q&A in
QuickTime sessions because one person's
question tends to be interesting
to about 10% of the audience,
not 90%. However,
for those of you who are really
interested in hearing what other
people have to complain about,
I recommend that you come along
to the QuickTime feedback forum.
It's today.
It's at 3:00 or 3:30 p.m.
in Room J1.
And it'll be a lot of fun.
There'll be lots of people on the
stage and under the big spotlight.
The QuickTime API mailing list is a
great resource for asking questions
or having other kinds of discussion
about API-level programming issues.
There are a number of
QuickTime engineers who read the list,
and when we have time,
we sometimes reply to things.
Sometimes we don't have time,
or sometimes people don't
ask in very polite manners.
But
If you're lucky,
even if one of us doesn't have the time,
another developer will have been down
the same path as you're trying to tread,
and they can help you out as well.
So it's got a nice community.
Some of the things that...
Some of the specific things
that you'd like to find out can
be found in the Iceflow notes.
There's a whole lot of stuff
on the QuickTime developer
section of Apple's websites.
There's all of the sample code,
there's all of the tech pubs,
there's tech notes.
There's also the QuickTime engineering
team's ice flow notes,
which are extremely condensed bits
of information about specific issues
that we think are really important
or perhaps have a very strong
focus for some group of developers.
There's also a PDF file on the web,
which we seem to mention every session,
about the new things in QuickTime 4.1.
It's not that hard to find.
You should go and look.
If you get to the QuickTime roadmap,
I think there's a red
link to go to the PDF,
and I heartily recommend it.
It's grand.
But I think that's it.
I think we're done.
I look forward to seeing
you at the feedback forum.
Thank you.